[THEME MUSIC]
>> REGINA MEREDITH: I have
Dr. Zach Bush with me today.
We met at the
GaiaSphere event, where
I was very intrigued
by what he had
to say about how our food
supply is affecting our hormones
and sexuality.
By extension, this would affect
our relationships in large part
because of the commercial
agriculture practices
we're being exposed to.
Big circle of events.
So let's go to Zach.
Good to have you with me, Zach.
>>ZACH BUSH: Regina, it's a
pleasure to be here with you.
>> REGINA: I have wanted
to interview you for years.
So your background
is interesting.
Some people already
know your background.
Some people do not.
You were practicing mainstream
medicine earlier in your career
and even through cancer
therapies, things which now you
just think, oh my
god, what was I doing?
So let's talk about your
transition from, oh my god,
what was I doing, to
where you are now.
>>BUSH: Yeah, for 17 years,
in academic medicine training
and then practice and
the like and working
in large-scale tertiary
university hospital
systems and the like.
And my cell biology
work was ultimately
working in this interface
between metabolism,
the way in which the body
creates energy, and how cancer
occurs, which is really a
collapse of our capacity
to create energy in the cell.
And so I was studying
in that space,
developing novel chemotherapy
in the areas of nutrients rather
than poisons, and
in that process
started to realize
that I had never
been allowed to ask
root cause solutions
and root cause causes that
are driving this cancer
epidemic that my generation of
physicians got to be witness to.
And so for that, I
started to reach outside
of the pharmaceutical model
and then spent about 10 years
running an integrative
clinic and ended up
finding myself in
the same place that
in both the allopathic
western medicine
model and the alternative health
functional medicine thing.
In both cases, we were
training our patients
to look outside of
themselves for health.
And in that journey,
started to discover
within my own spiritual
development and everything else
that there is
absolutely nothing that
can come from outside of
ourselves to complete ourselves,
whether it be the completion
of our spiritual identity,
our physical
identity, our health.
And so realized in
that journey that we
had to bring that full circle
and stop looking outside
of the body for the solutions
and realize that health was
going to emerge from within.
And so now I'm closing
my clinic and moving
into this space of the
journey of intrinsic health.
How do we discover
health within the body,
and how do we create a safe
environment where the individual
can start to explore that?
>> REGINA: And even though it
sounds esoteric on one hand,
it's not.
It's about light.
When it comes down to
it, it's about light,
the capacity to carry
light from the soul
into the physical
cells of the body.
And when that light
diminishes too much,
we see what we're
seeing right now.
I don't mean to be too negative,
but I spend a lot of time
traveling as you do in
airports and everything.
And sometimes it's
almost as though you're
living in a zombie population.
People just have this
pallor about them
and staring at their phones.
You don't feel the life
and color and liveliness.
You don't feel the light.
>>BUSH: Yeah, the life
force is certainly
diminishing on the
planet, and humans
are caught up in that decline.
And you see nature solving
for that all the time.
Nature is an
adaptive machine that
really has designed a system
in which adaptation is always
the driver, and that adaptation
is driving for diversity,
and that diversity is leading
to beauty, intelligence,
and ultimately an ascendant
path towards more light.
And so there's a couple of
different forms of energy
that you're touching on there.
One would be what
might be called
the soul, which is
an energy field that
pre-exists the first cell.
And so you've got
an energy field
that is present at the
moment that a cell decides
it's going to procreate.
And so you've got
sperm and an egg.
And there's this
massive flash of energy
that happens called
the zinc flash there
at the moment of conception.
And that massive
lightning bolt moment,
you have an alignment with
biological system, which
is one that is creating light
in the three dimensional reality
here.
And then you have the
template that had been there
just a moment ago.
And the template is
in the physics plane.
And so you have a quantum
field or biophysics interaction
happening where the quantum
field template by which you're
going to self-organize
a human body
is being now joined
by the biology, which
is going to be expressed in
the third dimension here.
The light that you were
saying and the soul holds
is actually the
potential of light
or the potential of particle.
So it's a waveform, and it
has complex geometry to it.
And each soul,
each identity seems
to have a different geometry
in that quantum field.
So that's the original template.
And then manifesting within that
template is what I would say
is more of our collective
experience of light.
So it's no longer
waveform, but it's actually
light in the visible
spectrum perhaps
or in the ultraviolet spectrum.
And in these spectrums
of light generation,
particle can be created.
And so that's how a
cell becomes something--
is the transmission of light
from wave into particle.
The particles coalesce into
several different identities
of molecular structure,
and then they
form to this invisible template
that's in that soul structure.
And so when we start talking
about cancer and the light
within the human, we're talking
actually about sunlight.
And so that's not the soul.
That's like expressing
itself necessarily
in each cell to create
enzymatic function and DNA
synthesis and all that.
That's solar light.
>> REGINA: In the mitochondria.
>>BUSH: And it's released
by the mitochondria,
but ultimately, it's
coming in from sunshine.
And then the chlorophyll
within the plant
grabs that sunshine, stores
it between two CO2 molecules.
So carbon dioxide is
the code for life.
Without CO2 on this planet,
we would have no life.
And so the tiny bit of CO2 that
we have in this atmosphere is--
0.04% of the atmosphere is CO2.
So you've got this
tiny amount of CO2
that is necessary for
sunlight to be stored.
And it's this interface
between CO2 and the atmosphere
and this miracle of the
chlorophyll within plants
that allowed the
potential for light energy
then to eventually get
into a single cell,
would be a bacteria
or multicellular
cooperation of the fungi
or multicellular organisms
like an earthworm or
ultimately a human.
This was a generative process of
getting more and more sunlight
to be held within a single cell.
And so right now, we represent
in this kind of biology
of macro flora and fauna.
The plants and animals
that are here currently
are the brightest things
that have happened.
And it is very bright.
And so there's so much sun
being released in every cell
of your body, 70 trillion
cells cranking sunlight,
that every cubic centimeter
of the mitochondria that are
filling each of your cells is
generating about 10,000 times
more sunlight than the surface
of the sun per cubic centimeter.
And so the difference
between physics and life
is a concentration of light.
>> REGINA: Mind blowing to
think about conceptually.
And so at the same
time, when you
measure light in living light,
in mitochondria, in human cells,
and so forth, you're
finding that the light
that we're emitting is actually
going down in concentrations.
I mean, obviously, we're
indoors all the time,
and we're not even
exposed to sunlight.
A lot of people are no longer
exposed to sunlight at all.
So before we go into the
other agricultural issue,
let's talk about sunlight.
Let's talk about CO2 because
that's a naughty word
in some political movements.
>>BUSH: Yeah, it's
interesting how
we have demonized biology, and
in this case, chemistry as well.
And so we've demonized CO2 as
the cause of climate change.
Again, we have
tiny amount of CO2.
We have 20% of our atmosphere
in oxygen, some 70% nitrogen,
and 0.4%--
way, way, way down there
in the CO2 concentration.
And it's necessary for life.
And so we need to
reverse that narrative.
It was a convenient
marker for human behavior
because many of our
industrial forces
produce CO2, driving a
car, creating concrete.
>> REGINA: And it was worth
talking about that had to be
talked about.
>>BUSH: Yeah, I think
where it is helpful
is it starts us to understand
that there is actually
a cycle of life.
If anything that
is energy, which
is money, fuel in
your gas tank, love,
these are all forms of energy.
And nature knows no waste.
Humans have created waste
streams because we believed
in these scarcity models.
And when we see scarcity, we
think that's how nature works.
And so we believe
we're functioning
in a scarce universe as humans.
And for that, we
create a waste streams.
What the CO2 story could
have done instead of saying,
here's the horrifying reality
of global warming and everything
else, it could have showed
us that the Earth is
in a respiratory cycle.
And when you kill the
lungs of the planet,
she can't take her next breath.
>> REGINA: Right.
And we have done that.
Those are our logging
practices globally.
>>BUSH: Or soil practices,
even deeper than the--
>> REGINA: And soil--
yeah.
And we're going to go
right there in just a sec.
So this whole notion that
we are killing our planet
through our practices
lays a great amount
of guilt and urgency and
shame on a lot of people.
How would you actually
frame that so those
aren't the response, but
something more proactive
is a response?
>>BUSH: Well, the exciting
thing about any form of stress
is it's the only thing
that creates change.
And the only thing that nature
seems to love to do is change.
And so if you look at the
4-billion-year history of this
planet, there has never been
a recreation of the past.
Nature's always striving
for the next expression.
And so this adaptation drive
that lies within nature
is manifest in the beauty
that we see around the planet.
And the more severe
stress you put on biology,
the more vigorous it imagines
the near future and far future.
And it does that
through the virome.
And so we've demonized CO2.
We've demonized viruses.
But in fact, CO2 is actually
the storage for energy
that allows biology to happen.
It is the
concentration of energy
that allows for us to move
from physics to biology.
And then biology adapts
through constant changes
of the genetic code.
And it does that now by viruses.
And so viruses are a description
of genes that can travel.
And they are not alive.
They're not like bacteria
and fungi and yeast.
These are genetic envelopes.
These are, basically,
messages of the future.
And so a virus is nothing more
than the potential of life
on Earth in a few years.
And what happens when you
put things under stress
is they accelerate the rate at
which they're producing viruses.
So if I go through
a stressful day,
had a stressful
Monday, that day, I
started producing genetic
variants of myself
and then secreting
those through my breath,
through how of my secretions,
my urine, my sweat, everything
suddenly generating
new information that
will end up in nature.
And so it'll end up
in the water system.
It'll end up in the air.
So I'm generating a
new potential for life
on the other side
of my stressful day.
>> REGINA: Viral, would you say?
>>BUSH: I go viral.
>> REGINA: Yeah, you go
viral, a good way to put it.
We can all understand that.
So let's go back
to the Earth itself
because again everything you
do, everything that you work in
is steeped in
finding our way back
toward a more healthy template.
We can never go back
to where we were.
I mean, we know that.
But what we did also
learn during COVID,
which was so amazing, is if
you just stop kicking Earth,
she's fine.
She'll regenerate
almost overnight.
So we know the Earth has
this incredible regenerative
capacity, and I
assume we do, too.
>>BUSH: We are nature.
Yeah.
>> REGINA: We are nature.
>>BUSH: It's really
hard to remember that.
We've so lost it.
English is such an
interesting language
in that it thrives on the
differentiation between things.
If you go to any of our
Indigenous languages that--
I have a Celtic lineage.
And so if you go back to my
Celtic lineage, the language
itself only understood itself
within the context of nature.
And there was no
differentiation.
There was no word for nature
because it was everything.
>> REGINA: Everything
was nature.
>>BUSH: Yes.
It's like saying there's
this other thing.
And so our fascination
in the English language
of differentiating or separating
everything into their categories
became a very powerful
tool for science,
but that then created
a scientific belief
that we were
separate from nature.
And you can go look at the
Oxford English Dictionary
and find out that
we define nature
as everything in the firmament
of the Earth, minerals, plants,
animals, except--
no, it doesn't say except.
It says as opposed to humans or
anything humans have created.
And so we've put ourselves
not just outside of nature
but in opposition to nature.
>> REGINA: Opposition to nature.
And I bring that up because you
talk about in some of your talks
that this Earth was covered
in grassy lands, grasslands,
and there were weeds,
what we call weeds now.
There were grasses and
weeds and everywhere.
And it kept the soil
at a certain condition
and temperature and the air as
well, the ambient air around us.
So unless we're gone,
it's unlikely to go back
to looking exactly like that.
But those principles
still apply.
Earth will still generate
these things if we allow it.
But let's talk
about what happened
because this is a big part
of the story when glyphosates
were introduced.
>>BUSH: Yeah, so
glyphosate is a name
of a chemical that's
become the most
ubiquitous toxin on the planet.
We spray about 4 billion
pounds of this single chemical
into our soil and water
systems globally each year.
And so it really, by
volume and by mass,
just dwarfs anything
else that we're
putting in from a small
molecule chemical standpoint.
And these small
molecule chemicals
are in a family called
organophosphates.
And the first really famous
one that we developed in the US
under a small company
called Monsanto at the time
was for chemical warfare.
And so that chemical
was called Agent Orange,
but it was an organophosphate,
same family of molecules.
And we used it to
devastate anything
that was green in
Cambodia and Vietnam,
to make bare that entire zone.
Yeah, we devastated
the peoples there.
I actually grew up with
them interestingly.
Right here in Boulder,
where we're filming,
I grew up in low-income housing
here with the Hmong people
that had been
displaced from Cambodia
because of Agent Orange.
And little did I
know my career was
going to take me to be one
of the scientific groups that
would study that family of
molecules more than any other.
So it was an interesting
foreshadowing of my future
I think growing up here
with the Hmong people.
And my earliest memories of
living there was walking across
the little plank out to
the community garden that
was adjacent to the government
housing, and each of these Hmong
women were kneeling
in the garden
and would kneel there and
tell a story all day long.
So they were in their
traditional gowns
telling their
traditional stories.
And here they are displaced
12,000 miles from home.
And they had joy.
And they had a sense of home.
They had a sense of
belonging because they had
the Earth beneath their feet.
And they had the self-expression
of creativity and story.
And so that stuck with me.
And we started
Farmer's Footprint
as this awareness campaign of we
can actually become what we eat,
which is good news.
We can actually begin
to eat Earth again.
We can begin to
eat nature again.
And as we let go our convenience
lifestyle of processed
everything and to really
start to understand
what nature intended for,
which is really light--
it's the passage of
light through food.
And so when you start
to see food as light
and you start to understand
its relationship to sun
and you understand its
relationship to the soil,
you simply tell a different
story to your children.
And you develop
a different home.
You develop different offices
because now every step,
it starts to be,
where is my soil?
Where is my sun?
Where is my soil?
And for the human, that
soil is within the gut,
and we spring out of
this an incredible life
force out of the organic
garden that is a human being.
>> REGINA: But most of the Earth
isn't an organic garden anymore.
Most of the Earth of
the, quote, "productive,"
industrialized agriculture
anyway, is the other.
It's been exposed to the
organophosphates to--
I mean, RoundUp as one
of the labels for it.
So you look at this, and you
say, OK, let's look at what
the repercussions.
The reason we're talking about
is it has huge repercussions.
We're going to go into huge
extension of this, which
has to do with the development
of future generations
and the impact on our hormones.
This is huge.
So first of all, we'll
do the timeline quickly,
debut 1976 of glyphosate.
Obesity starts in the '80s.
Early '90s, crops were widely
sprayed by the early '90s.
>>BUSH: '91, we started not
just using them as weedkiller.
We started treating the
crops directly with RoundUp
right before harvest
as a desiccant.
So it started with
wheat and quickly moved
to the legumes, your lentils,
your soybean, all of this.
And so especially
in northern climates
where you have a
short growing season,
if your crop is
threatened, you can
spray RoundUp across the entire
crop and kill it in a few days
so that you can harvest
it early because you
need a dry crop to harvest
those following crops.
So 1991 is really started to
shift towards crop treatment
rather than a weed killer.
>> REGINA: So we're
35 years into that.
>>BUSH: Yeah.
And then by 1996, we have
squash, corn, soybeans,
all genetically modified so
that we could spray RoundUp
even before it was
supposed to be dead.
So it was really this
progression of use outside.
It used to be a weed killer, and
then it became a crop treatment
mechanism.
And so that was over
the course of the 1990s.
And so that's when
we see that light
diminished within the biology.
So you describe glyphosate
coming into the thing.
It functions as an antibiotic,
so it kills bacteria and fungi
in the soil, kills bacteria
and fungi in your gut.
>> REGINA: You need those.
They're full of light.
>>BUSH: That's where
that carbon is coming in.
So your long carbon
chain that is
waiting to get to
your mitochondria
is glucose or fatty acids.
So sugars and fats are
long carbon chains of CO2
that were put together
to store sunlight.
So sugar and fat is coming
through the microbiome
in different ways.
It's metabolizing it
down, breaking it down
to bioavailable
resources for the body.
And then that travels in.
And unfortunately,
that glyphosate
is a water-soluble
molecule that's
now traveling with
your food and water
all the way down to
the terminal cell.
So now every one of
your 70 trillion cells
is taking up the nutrients.
It's taking up glyphosate,
which is an antibiotic.
And of course, those
little mitochondria
are little tiny bacteria
that live inside of you,
and they die very quickly
under that chemical threat.
>> REGINA: And we can't have
that because that's our transfer
of energy.
That's our life force.
>>BUSH: So you can no
longer liberate life force
from glucose and fatty acids.
And so the body circulates
it back to the liver.
And now the liver
starts storing fat.
That's called fatty liver.
And so by the late '80s, we have
the type 2 diabetes epidemic
beginning because we could
no longer get the light out
of the food.
And so we started
storing food as fat.
>> REGINA: And now, as you
just said it a minute ago,
it is an epidemic.
Diabetes is an epidemic.
>>BUSH: All of the chronic
diseases began going epidemic,
meaning that it reached every
nook and cranny of the planet
over the last 30, 40 years.
And the thing that
makes it epidemic
is that it's traceable to
an environmental factor.
And so it's not just
a human condition
because you can track
the environmental causes
of the human experience.
And so I think that's what
really makes something
an epidemic.
If disease was simply
being expressed within us,
then we'd have to look
within for the problem.
But disease is trackable
by these outside influences
that are shifting our
internal resources.
>> REGINA: So now not only
is diabetes an epidemic,
now we're having wheat
sensitivity and celiac all from
these pesticides.
>>BUSH: Yeah, so
the phenomenon there
was this high concentration of
the glyphosate chemicals being
used towards the end
of the crop production.
So we end up with higher
residues in our finished food
products.
And for that, my
laboratory has been
studying the effects
of glyphosate
directly on human cells.
And we were able to demonstrate,
almost 10 years ago now,
that when you add glyphosate
to the gut membrane,
you break the tight
junctions that
create a healthy barrier
between the outside world
and your immune system.
And when that breaks,
it's been popularized
with the term leaky gut.
But what's happening
is your immune system
is now having to see
everything in your environment.
And so it began with gluten
sensitivity is famous,
but it's really food
sensitivities in general
became normal.
So you got one in four
kids that now that
has a food sensitivity to
avocados or nuts or seeds
or whatever it is.
And so you've got this
vast amount of dysfunction
because the food is no longer
being processed before being
shown to your immune system.
>> REGINA: Right.
It's leaking through
your guts literally,
through the membrane
into the system.
So then, of course, we
have a rise in cancer
that's following this that--
everybody knows about-- I mean,
you can go into stats, autism.
Everything starts
rising at this time.
So you can't really
deny something happened.
>>BUSH: Yeah, it was the late
1990s is when everything kinda
hokey sticked up.
So we had obesity starting
to mount and then 1990s hit
and suddenly autoimmune and
immune dysfunction, allergies,
food sensitivities, but then
direct organ system dysfunction.
By 2002, we had like one
in four girls in the United
States at age 12 were found to
have antibodies to their thyroid
already.
And so this autoimmunity
to our own glands,
to our own system
of communication,
which is the hormone system.
And so we were
seeing this breakdown
of relationship,
which is actually
what the immune system is.
It's not a battleground to
make a sterile body, which
is still what's being taught.
But the body is not
a sterile system.
It's actually a relationship
of a complex ecosystem
that expresses itself
in a human body.
And the immune
system's job is to keep
all the relationships balanced.
And when you start to break that
relationship between the gut
microbiome and the soils
within us to that gut membrane,
to the immune system behind it,
you overwhelm the immune system,
and you get chronic
inflammation.
And chronic
inflammation then leads
to all of the diseases we
know today in our children,
attention deficit,
autism mentioned.
In our mid-single
digits, you're starting
to see precocious puberty
and pubertal dysfunction.
And then as you start to
go into 12 to 15-year-olds,
you're seeing a
depolarization of gender.
>> REGINA: And we're going to
get into that whole subject
and the extension of what that's
going to mean for society.
Just to wrap this part up, so
we see what has happened here.
So people watching this--
I mean, a lot of our
viewers, most of them,
probably say, yeah, well, that
doesn't matter so much for me
because I eat organically.
And we've gone out of our
way for 30-plus years to eat
organically.
>>BUSH: Yeah.
And the organic
movement, I think,
started in a very exciting place
where there was a recognition
in the '70s that we got to
not do this chemical thing.
We need to start,
again, having systems
that are growing real food
within the United States
where that movement began.
And so there was
already a recognition.
And if you look back, you can
go all the way back to Steiner
and Rodale and all these guys
back in the '50s and '60s that
were already saying it.
They're like, this is
going to destroy humanity.
They predicted the whole thing.
And so by the '70s, we
were starting to think, OK,
we got to have some way of
telling the consumer that
there's food that's been grown
through chemical agriculture
and there's food that's grown in
some connected state to nature
still.
And for that, we created
the organic movement.
But unfortunately, what we
find is that "what you resist
persists" is one of those
great phrases out there.
And when you just say anti--
so organic became
an anti campaign.
It's antiherbicides,
antipesticides.
But it never mentions in
the entire organic registry
of things check
boxes the quality
of your soil, the nutrient
density of your soil,
the nutrient density of
the finished product,
or whatever it is.
So we said, don't
do a bunch of stuff.
But when your
identity is don't do,
you don't become something new.
>> REGINA: So let's start
talking about what you do do.
How you do find
with all of this--
I mean, first of all,
you're saying, oh my god,
can I hook up to something and
have it all chelated out of me?
So in lieu of that, what
can we as individuals
start doing to make
sure we're eating
from very wholesome, full
earth-connected sources of food?
And are they exempt from that?
>>BUSH: Yeah, I think that step
one is if you can get organic
food, which is actually
relatively unusual
in the world--
but if you can find it, that's
a step in the right direction.
You're sending an
economic signal back
to the system that you're
trying to get away from,
a codependence with chemicals.
As you move into,
what can you do,
you start finding yourselves
in the space of permaculture,
biodynamic farming, new--
farming techniques, all kinds
of different specialties
that have developed within the
soil and crop management systems
over the last 50 to 80 years.
And a lot of these have been
proven at scale, millions
of acres under management.
And so this isn't some
theoretical backyard garden
solution.
This can happen and feed people.
And so this movement
has been long afoot.
And it's been now captured
in a bucket called
regenerative agriculture.
And so the regenerative
agriculture is really
a reimagination of
the organic movement
where it starts to say,
well, what do we do
rather than what we don't do?
>> REGINA: It's beautiful.
Biointensive and biodynamic
gardening is beautiful.
And it's even high yield
with beautiful flavors
to the vegetables and fruits.
I mean, there is
no downside to it.
>>BUSH: There is no
downside, and there's only
an alignment with nature
that's actually happening.
And as soon as you
align with nature,
you move from a scarcity
mentality and reality
into one of abundance.
And so we're really
talking about moving
into an abundance state
with our food systems.
That's never happened in recent
recorded history of the last
5,000 years.
We've been enslaving people
through war to grow food
since the Egyptians.
So it's like every
empire is actually
creating, more recently, through
economic manipulation, slave
labor somewhere in the
world to produce cheap food.
And so that's been 5,000
years of that behavior.
So we've been stuck in
that scarcity mentality.
And we have steadily been
engineering ourselves out
of sovereignty at
the food level.
And we don't have food security.
>> REGINA: The most basic level.
So now we have to
make it-- or we have
to have our own due diligence
to find these sources of food.
And then you're going to have
people say, yeah, but I mean,
I have four kids.
We're on limited income.
I can't afford organic.
So then how-- and I want to
ask you too about when you go
to farmer--
I live in an area that's
abundant with soil and actually,
biodynamically
grown food and such.
But then there are a lot of
people at the farmers market
that say "unsprayed."
They say we can't really
afford that certification.
So just briefly, how do
we connect in that way?
And what else do we do?
What else can we do--
I don't know, supplements
or meditation or whatever--
to start changing this?
>>BUSH: Ultimately,
we don't need
to change our
behavior towards soil.
We need to change the
behavior of the human.
And so we need to realize
that we are of nature.
Nature is speaking through
us, acting through us,
and creating through us.
And if we can come
back into that reality
where we no longer have
the abstract belief that we
are separate from nature and
we start to really reconnect
to our natural systems,
reconnecting to ultimately one
another in new relationship,
we will create a different food
system.
But I believe we have to
recreate that human culture that
will then express
that new reality.
>> REGINA: No, that
makes perfect sense.
So it's a little bit
of a long haul thing,
but now we know what
we're up against.
And now let's look at
some of the effects that
have taken place, you've
already gone into.
The hormonal profile of each
generation, since all of this
became ubiquitous,
has started changing.
And let's talk about
what you're seeing.
You talked a little bit about
young girls and thyroid,
but let's go beyond that.
>>BUSH: Yeah, so you start
to get into very quickly
the hormones that start to
dictate the gender polarization
that happens in utero.
So while we're
developing mother's womb,
we are differentiating,
from our genetics templates,
the energetic
expression of gender,
and that relies on
testosterone and estrogen
as two examples within it.
But there's actually 4,000
hormones that have been
recognized within
the human body.
We've only named 40 of them.
And so there's
all these hormones
that we don't even name
and are very much involved
in this process.
But to dumb it down to two,
it's testosterone and estrogen.
And the differentiation
of those actually
creates changes in our
neurologic development.
And so these deep
nuclei within the brain
are changing size based on their
testosterone-estrogen ratios
in the womb.
And so as you start to
create hormonal disruption
through the chemical
environment, and the chemicals
that we're talking about
that are diminishing
light energy by killing the
mitochondria within the womb,
that intense reality
of diminishing light
within a manifesting
human being,
you're challenging its
ability to create life.
And in that stress,
interestingly, testosterone
and estrogen start to
equate instead of polarize.
And so when a male embryo or a
male adult goes under stress,
the testosterone will start
to convert to estrogen. When
the female child, infant,
all the way to the adult
starts to go into
stress, the estrogen
is converted to testosterone.
And so under stress, we
go into a unisex nation.
And so this is a
unisex reality that's
emerging because of
the simple phenomenon
of the way in the endocrine
system adapts to stress.
>> REGINA: So I'm going to get
a little esoteric here then.
So we're looking at a time
ahead where people fall into,
on one hand, a more cohesive,
collaborative, peaceful way
of being.
If you want to get religious
about it or whatnot,
we talk about patriarchy
ruling for many years.
And we have a lot of separation
wars and a lot of testosterone.
The human male is loaded
with testosterone.
And females, we know the
nurturing and so forth.
So I'm asking two questions--
two forks here at one time.
If we're trying to learn to
become collaborative as peoples,
is there something
that's almost driving
this neutrality in gender
identification in utero?
Is there maturity, I should say?
Is there something
on a larger scale
that's driving that to create a
less polarized environment we're
living in?
On one hand, physically, we
eliminate the polarization.
We eliminate the people.
We go away because there's
not the same amount of sex.
There's not procreation
going on in the same way.
So if you could talk
about both streams of it.
>>BUSH: Well, it's
interesting when
you start to hang out with
Indigenous wisdom keepers
from around the world.
This was predicted.
It was predicted
that we would have
this disillusion
of the masculine,
feminine in its old
expressions and all that,
and something new would emerge.
And so this is the
opportunity to recognize
that stress or
pathology on biology
is not seen as an endpoint.
It's not seen as actually
disease by nature.
It's seen as a new opportunity.
And so nature's always looking
for the next opportunity.
And the thing that creates
that is always stress.
And so 55 million
years ago, it was
an asteroid that hit
the planet killed
all the topsoil worldwide.
Now it's glyphosate.
And we're spraying 4 billion
pounds of it globally.
And so we're killing
the topsoil and creating
that existential stress
on the environment.
And nature says, fantastic,
here's my next opportunity.
And so I think we can perhaps
look at each other in grace
right now and have complete
nonjudgment on the situation
of, how did we get here?
It's important to understand how
we got here or else we're not
going to have the opportunity
to become the new thing.
>> REGINA: We got
to find a way out.
Yeah.
>>BUSH: And so understanding
the march of glyphosate
isn't here to judge a
company or products.
We created these companies.
I think that's something
we forget a lot.
We created these
companies because we
stopped growing our own food.
1945, this country was growing
40% of its food in the backyard
gardens.
Now, 0.01% of our food is being
grown in backyard gardens.
So we created
chemical agriculture
so that farmers with no
labor-- because the kids
didn't come back to the
farm after World War II.
And so with no
labor, the farmers
were being demanded to grow
more because nobody wanted
to bother with the-- so we
created the chemical food
industry, high fructose
corn syrup and TV dinners.
And the 1950s was this explosion
of nonnatural food systems,
Wonder Bread, Twinkies.
So it was fake--
>> REGINA: Swanson's TV dinners.
>>BUSH: Now it's fossil
fuel being repackaged
as new chemicals, things like
saturated, unsaturated fats
and all this stuff.
So we were creating all
of these new chemicals
that we were calling food.
And it's interesting that we
are having a pushback on that.
You see Twinkies
going out of business.
Wonder Bread's gone.
And so there is this
starting to return
as a species to understanding
that nature actually tastes
better and actually creates
more generative energy
for our bodies.
And so we're just
naturally moving back
towards selection for real
food, which is encouraging
that we're capable.
But if we don't understand
how we went on that arc,
we won't do it quick enough.
>> REGINA: Right.
And so what happens when
you have a species that
is adapting due to
stress for the women
to become more
masculinized and the men
to become more feminized?
I mean, we are going into--
I've been looking at all
the reason-- everybody has,
if you've watched anything.
Looking at all the recent
charts of population collapse,
we're not in growth.
We're in population collapse.
Certain countries are just--
it's almost sad.
On one level, it's time
for radical change.
So these infrastructures
need to reform, transform,
be birthed again.
I get that.
But when people in
a political way say
we have to support this
or that or the other thing
because we have too many
people on this planet,
and they're rejoicing the fact
that the decline in population
is happening without thinking
of the extension of that.
The extensions are huge.
>>BUSH: Yeah.
And you've got governments
really paying attention.
China is in a very
awake state right now
as a government of realizing
the negative population
spiral that they're in is
going to destroy their country.
>> REGINA: Oh, absolutely.
There's no infrastructure left.
There's no Social Security.
There's no Medicare.
All that stuff goes
when you don't have
replacement population anymore.
>>BUSH: That's right.
>> REGINA: So then now you
have a whole vulnerable older
population.
Their kids better be
ready to take care of them
because the state's
not going to do it.
>>BUSH: Yeah, we have, I think,
what's called the sandwich
generation right now where we
have 30-year-olds that are still
holding on to the
last of health.
They were the last generation
to have that polarity of gender
and all of this going on.
And those 30 to 40-year-olds are
now supporting their elders that
got sick faster than expected.
And so they had to take early
retirement because mom's got
Alzheimer's.
Dad's got Parkinson's.
And then their kids are getting
sicker faster than they ever
have before.
And so the sandwich generation
is this demonstration of we
have the last productive
generation right now.
>> REGINA: A lot of stress.
>>BUSH: And a lot of
stress on both sides.
The children coming
up, the elders there.
And so we're putting
the whole society
under a productivity collapse.
And it's not surprising that we
have this new explosion of AI
and computerized systems
and robotics coming on.
>> REGINA: They're going to
come in and fill the gap.
>>BUSH: To come fill the gap.
And so if we say, oh, good,
fortunately, those came along,
then we will go extinct.
>> REGINA: Yeah, we're
on the wrong path then.
>>BUSH: But there's
this opportunity
to wake up right now and move
into this realization of we are
biologic beings
that move in light,
and our light relies
on the amount of CO2
this Earth can breathe.
And the only thing that
breathes is the soil.
Trees move water.
They can bring energy down.
But they're only a very small
part of the respiratory cycle.
It's mostly grasslands
and savannas that
are that lung of the planet.
And we wiped those out in
the name of agriculture.
And now we need to
reverse that pattern,
and we need to redream what
grasslands look like as grazing
of normal herd intensity
that used to graze and move
long distances.
We fenced the world in the
name of property ownership,
and none of the animals
can move anymore.
And so we've lost the
motion of life on the planet
through fencing.
And even in conservation, they
did this giant national parks
fenced in Africa and everything
else and save this animal.
So we'll fence this off
and push people off.
So we've fenced this world into
this place of no relationship.
>> REGINA: So we have to go
back to that relationship,
but we have to also deal with
the reality that a generation,
two, three generations of people
have this changed hormonal
profile, which brings up
a metaphysical opportunity
for friendship.
A lot of the really
younger generations,
when you see in terms of
social media or entertainment,
has seem to have more
of a friendship bond
than Romeo and Juliet bond.
When I was young, you just
fall in love, and that's that.
A lot of polarity, a lot of
sex, a lot of falling in love.
Now it seems to be
tempered with what
we talked about earlier
with this lack of polarity
or lessened polarity
into more of a friendship
zone on relationships.
So let's talk about the
hidden opportunity in that
while we can still get
enough polarity back
that we still have people
to populate the planet.
>>BUSH: That would be
the lovely outcome.
And I think we can wake
up quick enough for that.
And I think that healing
happens logarithmically faster
than disease.
And I've learned this in the
laboratory over 30 years.
I've learned it in my
clinic over the years.
And I've seen it in myself.
It can take decades to do
the destruction that would
cause a cancer cell to occur.
And it takes seconds for that
to remit if it's reconnected
to the original design.
And so as we release
the stress factors that
are pushing on us and the
chemical reality that we live in
is part of that, but the
emotional, spiritual stress
that we're under equates
to that in my mind.
I think they're just yin-yang
of the same side of the coin.
And so as we start to lose
the fear, guilt, shame
paradigm of being
human, and we start
to realize we are
nature imagining itself,
and we are the imagination
of nature past,
and we are now cocreating
with nature the life to come,
and as we move into that
cocreative relationship
to nature, we're going to
really have a fundamental shift
in relationship to that planet.
And we can become part of
the solution very quickly.
>> REGINA: So what do you see
relationships of the future
looking like?
Because I know you and
I-- we talked off camera.
We're both really
just loving the notion
of letting friendship come
first, even in male, female,
masculine, feminine, regardless
of what body you're in,
relationships, having
friendship rise up
as this little sprout at
the core of this attraction.
>>BUSH: Yeah, it is
an exciting paradigm,
and it's such a relief that
we have the solution sitting
right in front of us.
Because as we look out at
the bigger effort to partner,
we see a lot of stress
in that environment.
The vast majority of
marriages are failing.
The vast majority of kids
coming into the world
are not of a marriage anyways.
Especially in urban
environments and all of this,
you've got the vast
majority of pregnancies
happening outside of marriage,
and there's no marriage to come.
And so already there's a
dissolution of that structure.
But then once made, that
marriage is more than 50%
likely to dissolve.
And we saw an acceleration of
that during these recent years.
And so we're seeing
stress around that.
And the society is
trying to express
all kinds of new options.
And so it's desperately looking
for those new opportunities
and expressing
itself in all kinds
of definitions of relationship.
But what I see is
that it's like me
moving from allopathic medicine
to functional medicine.
When you kick the
doctor off the stool
and say, well, this is
the new toolbox that's
going to work for you, but
it's outside of the body still,
it's not going to solve it.
And this is what we've
done with relationships,
I believe, is we have
replaced one codependent model
with another codependent model.
And this is described really
well in the course of miracles
almost 50 years ago now.
It said that humans only
do special relationship.
Special relationship
is a situation
in which you look
at another person,
and you see in them
a trait that you
don't think you can
get from source,
and you go and
bond to that trait
until you've drained it
out of them, and it's gone,
and then you leave.
>> REGINA: Yeah,
that's not good.
>>BUSH: So this is how we
are treating our Earth.
We see something
that we think she
has that we can't get from
source, energy, whatever it is,
and we take from
it until it's gone,
and then we move
further abroad to find
more supply chain for our
food and everything else.
And we are doing this to
one another in relationship.
And how is that happening?
Why are we draining
each other of life?
I started a nonprofit
a couple of years
ago called the Institute
of Natural Law,
and we're understanding
the systems of natural law
as a foundation for
our new society.
And this is not
new historically.
It's just new to an abstract
reality of our modern societies.
But natural law was the system
that almost every Indigenous
peoples on the Earth
were practicing
as individuals, as
households, as communities,
and as nation-states.
And we saw empire
come and replace that.
And so empire became a more
lucrative and more powerful
way of concentrating
energy in small spaces
under fewer hands than
natural law had allowed.
So it became a potent tool.
There's lots of factors that
dictate the laws of nature,
but I can tell you
that the result is
adaptation and biodiversity.
And so it's really
interesting that we then
have come along in our
empire model of scarcity.
We need to own
everything we can.
We did that to relationship.
And so we developed an
ownership model of one another.
>> REGINA: It's true.
>>BUSH: And in
that ownership, we
start to suck life
out of one another.
And that happens
emotionally, spiritually.
But one of the really
startling things
that we found in our clinic is
that we were using these energy
field cameras, looking at that
energy production from the body.
And what we found is
that the reflexology map
on the fingertips can show
you the energetic pattern
within deep organ systems.
And it turns out the ring
finger on your left hand
is the female endocrine
system within every one of us.
And when you slip a
ring on that finger,
you disrupt the
meridian system of that.
>> REGINA: Interesting.
>>BUSH: And so spiritually,
emotionally, I say,
here's your engagement ring.
And now I own you.
As a male, I own you.
I didn't put the ring on.
I put a ring on you.
>> REGINA: Well, so we switched
another finger or ditch it
or wear it like we did when we
went steady around our necks?
>>BUSH: This sounds right
to me, put it on a pendant
and wear it there.
Because as soon as you
put it on any finger,
you're going to disrupt
the meridian system.
And so I don't know
if it was an accident.
They say, well, this is the
one closest to the heart.
Therefore, you do it.
Well, the reason it's
closest to the heart
is because that's the
meridian system that runs
your entire endocrine system.
And so pulling that ring off
will accelerate metabolism,
help you lose weight, turn
your sex drive back on.
There's lots of
things that can happen
when you get that endocrine
finger working again.
And so I don't know if
it was a mistake or not,
but it seems curious that we
created a contract for males
to pass wealth down,
and we slipped that ring
on the finger of the woman.
And for a male to slip
it on that finger,
I haven't suppressed
my testosterone axis
because my right
side is my masculine.
So I'm diminishing a
bit of my feminine.
And so I start putting wedding
rings on males a long time ago.
And what's going
to happen is you're
going to have an imbalance
and overexpression
of the masculine traits and
underexpression within the male.
>> REGINA: Well, we have that.
You can see it on the Earth.
>>BUSH: And so there
might be questions...
>> REGINA: It's fascinating.
But we packed a lot
into 45 minutes.
But I wanted to get a bit
of the metaphysical glimpse
over some of the more dire
consequences of agriculture,
for example, and the decisions
we've made on the ground.
And I love what you had to
say just a few moments ago.
The fact is that healing
happens way faster
than the process of disease.
So if we were to
embrace it right now,
anyone listening
to this and says,
you know what, I'm going to
find a biodynamic, for lack
of a better description,
a source of food now,
and I'm going to look
my partner in the eye
and think of what I can
witness and accept and give
to that person instead of what
I can steal from them, what
would happen to this planet?
>>BUSH: We can't
imagine how beautiful
it gets because the
dinosaurs could not
imagine birds, mammals, humans.
That's what happened when
they went under enough stress
to disappear.
We're now putting
extinction-level stress
on a planet, and whatever exists
here is already genetically
imagining a world
we cannot imagine.
There was no wildflowers.
There were no deciduous trees.
There was no fall colors
before the last extinction.
And so the planet
went into rainbows
with the last extinction.
>> REGINA: It's beautiful.
>>BUSH: And so what
went from dinosaur
to human because of a stress
event is about to happen again.
And so we cannot imagine what
kind of glory comes on this
planet next.
But I think we can
participate in state of play
if we quickly align ourselves
with nature, which is to say,
every relationship, to
your soil, to your food,
to your partner,
to whatever it is,
has to focus on the question
of, how do we create adaptation
for the greatest
amount of change,
for the most rapid growth
of the individuals?
And for that, we're going to
create a different society.
>> REGINA: I've got
chills all over.
I love it.
Zach, thank you so much.
I really appreciate
what you had to say.
I feel like this is a
super important story.
People need to understand
what's going on
at the larger scale and
the beautiful potential
at the end of it.
Thank you so much.
>>BUSH: Glad to be with you.
>> REGINA: I hope you enjoyed
this conversation as such a huge
percentage of humanity is
struggling with both health
and relationships at
this time in history,
and Zach has some
beautiful answers for us.
To connect with his other works,
you can go to zachbushmd.com.
Until next time.
Thank you for joining
us here on "Open Minds."
[THEME MUSIC]